Hello everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the,
the Center. I'm your host, as always Ricardo Lobs.
And today I'm joined by Dr Samuel Viser. He's
a clinician researcher at Raps that is the reso
and uh a Su Polaris Aion social, former, formerly
assistant professor in the Department of Anthropology at mcgill
University. He is an anthropologist and psychosocial clinician working
at the intersection of Psychiatry, Cognitive Science and the
Social Sciences. And today we're focusing on topics like
uh internet and sociality, smartphone, addiction, culture, and mental
health, placebos, and the free energy approach to human
cognition and culture. So doctor via, welcome to the
show. It's a big pleasure to everyone.
Thank you so much. It's a great pleasure to
be here.
So I I would like to start with your
work on the internet and its impact on cognition,
well being social relations and so on. And so
could you start by telling us a little bit
about what you studied there exactly in terms of
the psychosocial impact that the internet has?
Yeah. Well, at first I was very interested in,
in what happens to humanity. Once we transition into
this digital niche, it seemed to me there was
a broad set of unexamined questions and then I've,
I've changed my mind many times over the years.
I, I do wanna say at this point, having
researched this phenomenon for, for many years, I think
the internet is an absolute disaster. I think that
human sociality once it's uh happening on the internet
exponentials by far the very worst, the most vile,
dangerous, violent aspects uh of human nature. But before
we get there, I want to tell you a
little bit about what I've learned or at least
some questions that I've asked, uh, when studying the
internet. Um, THE first thing I found fascinating is
that for me, studying human sociality on the internet,
taught me a lot about how sociality and how
the human mind works to begin with. Namely that
the human mind is this wonderful evolved organism that
is in many way, uh, that in many way
works just like the internet in that it's optimized
to outsource or download fitness relevant information and sometimes
entire cultural packages to a network of other minds
and to a network as well of cumulative cultural
knowledge that no single human could ever have, uh,
invented or devised sort of, uh, on her own.
Um, I've come to realize over the years that,
uh, when faced with an overabundance of information, a
lot of interesting and worrying things happen. I mean,
at first we might have wondered, uh, we might
have thought that having access to potentially the entire
memory of humankind, just, you know, uh at the
touch of a of a thumb scroll would be
a wonderful thing, but it doesn't seem to be
uh what happened. Um So let me, let me
backtrack a little bit and, and tell you a
bit more about the sociality and the human mind
and, and how sort of how they work on
the, on the internet. So, sociality speaking, refers to
the capacity to form joint goals to engage in
shared attentions and to engage in joint action. So
this is not uh unique to humans. There are
many social species, but humans have an added socio
cultural, symbolic and also narrative uh di dimension that
I that I mentioned briefly. Um So when, when
faced with an overabundance of information, we've learned that
the human mind tends to create these bottlenecks for
evolutionarily cheap or evolutionarily salient information. So things that
are particularly relevant for our fitness, things that the
human mind creates much more than Big Macs and
in fact, much more than sex. Pardon me a
minute, turn this off. Um So here we're talking
about things like uh threat, uh negativity, uh pornography,
uh tribalism, uh mass herding, social contagion and, and
sort of uh mass hysteria. Um So, unfortunately, we've,
we've learned that this is sort of what happens
to the average human once they're precipitated into this,
this kind of weird disembodied uh digital niche and
the internet in many ways has made us much
more paranoid. Uh It's made us much, much more
negative. I mean, remember that uh the human mind
is kind of like an overactive smoke detector. We
need to be very attentive to things that pose
a potential threat. We know the fabled stories that
we evolved in conditions that were very different from
the ones in which we live now, a very
very volatile environment environment. So we know that we
tend to be much, much more negative on the
internet. Uh We know that uh news with uh
negative content about danger, about social threats, in particular
about uh tribal affiliations tend to generate more clicks,
uh more shares, more, more time watching um et
cetera. So to, to again, make a long story
short, I would say that the net total, the
total impact of the internet on humanity, it's probably
a net negative. This is not to say that
it has not brought benefits. Uh I sometimes think
of it sort of like a tail land phenomenon
kind of like the distribution curve for IQ. There's
probably in the in the far right. And uh
a small number of people that has greatly benefited
from having access to so much knowledge. At the
same time, I wanna say with a huge social
cost, there is a social cost to just kind
of spending time online. Um But my fear is
that the uh the internet and, and I know
it's hyperbolic but may, may bring us to some
kind of some kind of doom. And we're seeing
it right now with the immense social polarization and
radicalization that is happening, the difficulty that people have
talking to each other the way in which people
have become much more on edge, much more un
nuanced. So yeah, I would say in a nutshell,
this is what I can tell you about the
the internet from an evolutionary perspective.
Uh But co could you explain a little bit
better how we, you studied the internet and its
impact impacts on human sociality and psychology? I mean,
I I'm asking you that also because I've had
people several different people on the show. And of
course, this is a very broad question and we
would have to perhaps break it down into several
different domains because the internet is a very broad
thing that includes many things like social media, pornography,
video games and so on and so forth. And
uh I've had people on the show, many of
them have been somewhat or, or even very critical
of the literature about the supposed psychological impacts of
some of those things. Of course, like for example,
if it is really produced more political polarization, the
supposed i psychological impacts of consuming pornography, uh the
psychological impacts of social media and so on. So,
uh I mean, before we get into uh perhaps
some of those criticisms, tell us a little bit
more about how you approach this, how you studied
it.
Uh Yeah, so perhaps on a the internet tends
to exponentially and exacerbate a lot of aspects of
human nature and a lot of our most basic
needs, most of which are social uh in different
ways and most of which are related to social
fitness in, in, in different ways. Um So, so
certainly the literature on the impact of the internet
on mental health, for example, is at this point
inconclusive and it is controversial. Some studies, for example,
claim to find a causal effect between say time
spent online or time spent on social media and
poor mental health and others don't. It may be
that there's a confound because there is different kinds
of construct and measures. So not studies, not all
these are looking at the same at the same
thing. Uh WE know as a matter of uh
association and and and correlation that generation z sometimes
called uh Igen. So I'm thinking of the works
of Jean 20 her more current work with Jonathan
Hyde, for example. So the generation born after 1994
the generation primarily socialized online generation that uh had
much less face to face contact uh appears to
be much more polarized. Uh And and it for
sure, suffers from uh much, much more frequent mental
health problems, especially depression, anxiety, personality disorders, uh self-harm
body identity disorders of all kinds. So, so it
is correct that the the causal link has not
been clearly established. Uh For many of us, it
sort of flies in the face, it it's kind
of obvious. So you mentioned different dimension. Uh You
mentioned social media, you mentioned uh pornography. Um WELL,
social media tends to fulfill the very basic narcissistic
human need. And I use the term narcissism in
the more psychodynamic psychoanalytic sense, not as a pathology,
but as a need to be seen, it needs
to be validated. This is this is completely normal.
So, on the one hand, there are very individualistic
societies uh have these strange injunctions saying that, you
know, you should just be who you are and
and not care what other people think. But of
course, uh we care most deeply uh about being
seen, about being validated. Um It's much, much more
stressful once we're projected into this, this bottomless, you
know, Agora of uh uh of again, just the
weight of the gaze on on young bodies is
extraordinary, extraordinarily stressful. So you take all the the
the the kinds of uh you know, the the
micro drama of everyday life of socialization of, of
wanting to be popular, for example. Well, that's a
lot more stressful on the internet uh being intimidated,
being ignored, for example, that that's much more popular,
but it's much more stressful on the internet. So
things like, like social credit scores have always existed
on an implicit level, humans are always scanning the
social world for models of whom they should emulate,
uh who their allies are, who their enemies are.
And, and we do it much, much more, we
do it faster. We do it much more potently
on the internet. So there's this, this again, kind
of exponential. Uh THE impact of pornography is, is,
is also quite controversial. Although several researchers and journalists
have noticed what has sometimes been called a sex
recession. It appears as though uh generation Z also
has less sex than previous generations. They have less
long lasting relationships. Uh They're also, and I think
we'll get there later. They, they've considerably uh shuffled
and reinvented what it means to be gendered, what
it means to be human, what it means to
be, to be sexual. Uh The overall result appearing
to be some kind of confusion. Um When it
comes to pornography, it could be that young men
in particular form very unrealistic expectations of what relationships
are like and that's not being matched in the
uh in what the real or the real world
uh sort of give them. Um But my own
concern as, as a researcher and a clinician is,
is uh on, on, on two dimensions. One being
political polarization is this mass hurting this kind of
tribalism, the extreme difficulty that people, younger people in
particular appear to have uh talking across ideological divide,
uh divides or, or different value systems. Um And
also on, on, on mental health um in a
moment, we'll probably talk a bit about, about addiction
as well. But I can tell you something that
child psychiatrist, child and adolescent psychiatrists see the world
over is uh as young Children who are sent
young, younger and younger Children who are sent to
the emergency room because when their parents try to
take away their tablets, they have an absolute meltdown.
Uh There's also things like the spread of uh
different kinds of potentially factitious mental health disorders. Uh
SELF harm has shown to be very contagious on
social media. Uh I could go on and on
with just horrific examples of, of what happens to
people and young people in particular once they're socialized
online in this disembodied space.
O OK. So as I said, several different things
that, that we could get into here, you mentioned,
for example, there at the end is self harm
and I would imagine you would be talking about
some of those, for example, challenges that sometimes we
see on the news that spread across, for example,
tiktok youtube and other kinds of social media. But
I mean, when it comes to that specifically, the
kind of way we tend to talk about it,
isn't it a little bit overblown? I mean, isn't
it the case that the number of actual victims
of those kinds of things is very little or,
or am I wrong?
Yeah. So I would say if we're talking about
the fear that young people will be uh groomed
or recruited by a, you know, network of statistic
individuals. I mean, that's thankfully quite rare and that's
overblown. Uh THE kinds of challenges that are not
so much viral on tiktok, but that are viral
in stories about those alleged challenges. I would say
those are, are greatly overblown blown. I'm concerned with
a much more initially, mundane and normal. Again, narcissistic
human need to be seen. Something that interests me
greatly about the human species is that uh you
know, I tend to think of it as a
kind of a fragility trade off. So, so about
2 million years ago or so, and then the
homo erectus lineage, we started, we developed cooper breeding,
collective child rearing. We started caring for the weak
caring, the stick. This was really the strength of
our species. So we traded off individualism and physical
strength for this kind of vulnerability. And from there
evolved two key human competencies, the ability to understand
other people's needs and the ability to signal our
suffering. So as to receive help, I sometimes think
there might be something of a of a the
risk of a if not fully a spare, a
kind of a a maladaptive risk in that it's
often quite advantageous socially to suffer. Uh If you
think of sibling rivalry, for example, often uh siblings
are competing for the weakest status. Uh SO as
to receive parental care and parental attention. So we've
also, we've also seen a lot of this, you
know, so called culture of victimhood of or of
culture of suffering, you know, online uh particularly for
generation Z. Uh This is again, not new. And
we know that comparing the cross cultural and historical
record, some cultures, some religions have elevated suffering is
an end in itself more than others. So again,
it seems to me there's a sort of universal
human risk. Um So going back to what we
see in, in the clinical context, we see a
lot of young people who uh you know, who
go through the difficulties of growing up and who
want to find networks of peers who want social
support and, and, and who share stories about how
they're unwell. And it's on that level that we
have seen um perhaps not full fledged epidemic, but
uh but but a tendency to exacerbate and to
copy behaviors like cutting, for example, or emphasizing, you
know, the, the I was gonna say the desire
to, to have a mental health condition. So we're
seeing a lot of this kind of sharing and
these organic modes of sociality among young people that
are articulated among suffering, sometimes relating in, in harm.
And, and there are really terrible stories that I'm
hesitant to talk that I'm hesitant to talk about
online because I don't want to create more sort
of contagion. But young people can go very far
in seeking attention and, and seeking this sort of
validation and in uh incrementally. But at some point
exponentially raising the bar are of the kinds of
distress that they will display online so as to
receive care, attention, validation, et cetera.
Mhm. So I I want to get into addiction
in a second but ju just before that going
back for a second to what I mentioned earlier,
particularly related to mental health. And and you mentioned
there, for example, the work by Jinwan Jonathan, he
and others trying to link the use of social
media to certain mental health issues like depression, anxiety
and so on in Gen Z and so on.
Um I I mean, since uh a and, and
you mentioned that there uh since that sort of
link is very disputed, uh is that something that
you uh draw from, is that something that worries
you a lot? Because I I mean, again, looking
at the studies and literature reviews, meta analysis and
so on, the results seem to be always the
same, it is either inconclusive or the results come
up the other way that is that the internet
instead of having negative psychological effects actually has positive
psychological effects. If, if the results come negative, usually
the effects tend to be tend to seem very
tiny. So I mean, is that something that at
least at this point we should uh care a
lot about since the basically the evidence is I
guess inconclusive,
right? Yeah, I think we ought to care about
that and we ought to conduct uh more meticulous
and more ecologically um valid studies. Um I would
like to hope that if we had a large
epidemiological surveys uh with uh uh a broader, a
battery of a very kind of broad psychosocial functioning
tests. Uh YOU know, the, the kinds of tests
that the, the, the P A framework for well
being in schools that the OECD uses. It seems
to me that we would have much richer data
and we, we might be able to establish perhaps
uh perhaps more, more causal effects. Um II, I
remain a fan and I hope it's not an
ideological bias of mine. II, I want to say
the data shows me otherwise, I will, I will
change my mind uh As a parenthesis II, I
also agree with the claim that in, in, in
some cases. Uh So that's, that doesn't mean just
for some humans, but it means in some aspects
of our lives, the internet has a positive psychological
effects. It is the source of socialization, it is
a source of, of meaning. It is, it is
a source of pleasure. There is no question. Um
But I was gonna say I'm, I'm I'm a
fan of the kinds of hypotheses put forth by
again, Jonathan, he and 20 via their parallel interest
in helicopter parenting. Uh So, from that perspective, which
is also an evolutionary or an evo devo evolutionary
developmental perspective, uh a young organism needs to sample
a broad enough range of statistical regularities in the
world, including a broad enough range of potential threats.
So as to learn, to optimize its system, so
as to learn to navigate the complexity and the
unpredictability of the world around them, I think that
once people are, are deprived of that, once they're
in their bedroom, once they're behind a screen, most
of the time, there's a very strange kind of
mismatch and gap that happens where they can be
very theoretically and intellectually knowledgeable about a whole range
of things. Uh They're not able to apply in,
in real life. So this, this may also be
one and this, this may also explain why once
people who are primarily socialized online, leave the bedroom
and enter even, you know, uh relatively safe space
like a university classroom, they get constantly triggered because
the world is sending them information that does not
match their expectations. And this creates that well with
the psychology we call anxiety or uh or, or
stress. Um So, so that may also be a
kind of a secondary effect of the internet. You
know, not so much the internet itself causes these
mental health difficulties, but the fact that people just
move and grow up in very different ways. And
there's so many quote unquote normal things that they're
not experiencing anymore. Mhm.
So let's get into addiction now because we've done
some work specifically on smartphone addiction. So, uh fir
first of all, how do you understand addiction in
this context? What does it mean exactly? Uh HOW
does it manifest?
Yeah. So I have a very pragmatic uh completely
Amoral, nonjudgmental perspective on, on addiction. Addiction is, is
anything that, that you do is too much anything
that will interfere with your everyday life and cause
uh impaired functioning uh in everyday life. Uh So
the the the studies on smartphone addiction that we've
conducted use a scale called problematic smartphone use uh
that looks at the impact of uh of phones
in a variety of aspects of everyday life from,
from sleep and, and neck pain to what interests
me the most sort of social relations. So for
example, uh you may really love being on your
smartphone. Uh But if other people tell you uh
frequently comment that you spend too much time on
your phone. If you missed opportunities, if you have
conflicts at home or at work, then we may
say that there's a problem.
Mhm But, but uh is do we know if
that's a widespread issue? I mean, are there many
people particularly, I guess in this case, younger people
suffering from smartphone addiction?
Yeah, we've conducted, we've conducted several studies including international
surveys and meta analysis of existing studies. Um The
first effect that we found years ago when we
were just trying to find different kinds of psychological
correlates of smartphone addiction. That was an early kind
of funky study that we did trying to see
if smartphone addiction correlated with hypnotisable. So we hypnotized
something like 600 university students in Montreal. We found
a a weak correlation. But we also found that
the the the the rates of smartphone addictions among
young university students were very, very high. This is
something that we found in subsequent studies. Uh SURVEYING
in our latest one has I believe something like
95 countries and it's almost always the same effect.
So younger people are much more addicted. Uh This
is also based on screen time measures. So they
spend much more time on their phone but also
females uh are are much more addicted. So then
there are some country level differences that are very
interesting. We see that on average East Asia, Southeast
Asia, the Middle East people are more addicted than
in Europe, North America is somewhere in the middle.
And we also find that countries with a high
cultural tightness. So tightness, looseness is a, is a
kind of a cultural measure that describes uh the
extent to which people abide by strict social norms
or not. So people in culturally tight countries uh
appear to spend more time on their phone and
be and be more prone to smartphone addiction.
And since we're focusing mostly on sociality here, what
are some of the effects that smartphone addiction has
on sociality specifically?
Well, as I said earlier, I think it exacerbates
and exponentials. Some of the riskiest aspects of sociality,
uh in particular, the group is the, the tribalism
and, and the kind of hurting. And this is
a very old question as you know, in, in
evolutionary anthropology, I mean, the the uh going back
to even Dunbar's number and the average number of
people that the uh average cognitive mind can, can
kind of handle. But we, but we know from
various sources of evidence and various disciplines that humans
are through and through very very tribal. We have
this intrinsic need to identify our allies uh but
also to identify our enemies. So it's interesting to
see that uh sociality on the internet has of
course, on some level extended the range and the
scope, certainly the geography of solidarity, but it has
created much more social competition and it has created
much more uh social divides and and, and we've
seen again, I want to say uh with the,
the conceptual tools that are available to us at
this point, we have not established a clear causal
link. Uh But we know that uh since the
advent of the internet, we appear to have become
much more politically polarized. Uh MORE so in some
countries than others, it could be that say the
kind of polarization that started peaking in North America
around 2016 with the Trump election appears to have
become contagious as well. So, so people have started
polarizing in Europe and in the rest of the
world around similar kind of cultural lines arguing about
similar kinds of uh of sacred values. Um And,
and I want to emphasize again, those mechanisms of
social contagion that I alluded to earlier when I
talked about the the spread of harm and that
the spread of illness uh copying kinds of phenomena.
So, so I would say that overall, in my
view, based on what I've seen so far, uh
polarization has increased and, and probably uh probably mental
illness has increased as a result of internet sociality.
So I would like to get now a little
bit more into mental health specifically. And uh this
is something uh this question is something that I've
already done. Uh SOME interviews on particularly of the
record you mentioned, for example, Doctor Lawrence Kier Mayer
w have on the show and we thought we
did an entire interview on this. But what role
does culture play in mental health?
I would say it plays an enormous part and
to appreciate that we can try to conceptually uh
break down different relevant dimensions of culture or, or
that part of human, that part of humanity that
is socio cultural. Um I, I like to use
a simple biological definition of culture. Um We know
that culture exists when we noticed behavioral differences, which
to the best of our knowledge arise through social
learning, social cultural learning, as opposed to uh simply
genetics. So whatever is not uh kind of innate.
So the impact of uh of that aspect of
humanity on mental health. Um Well, if we start
with the obvious dimensions of sociality, things like social
support, uh things like relational mobility, which is uh
the freedom that people have in different societies to
interact with uh different people, cultural tightness or looseness,
which I also mentioned uh also the things like
social status, which, which we'll talk a little bit
more about. Um But also all the constructs like
cultural consonants, cultural consonance is the extent to which
people feel that they live up uh to culturally
postulated goals. So, so whatever things are elevated as
good and true and important in a culture in
different domains. So what is a good family? Uh
What is a, a good career? Uh What is
a good romantic life like people tend to live
up measure themselves against these kinds of models. So
all these different constructs that I mentioned are known
empirically causally to have an effect, not just on
mental health uh but on, on the health um
social status in particular, which uh as it happens
is quite difficult to define in both social science
and in public health. It's not just income, uh
it's not just cultural capital. So there's sort of
linguistic and symbolic resources you have available, it has
something to do with the way uh your person
and your group is positively or negatively regarded, the
kind of dignity that is assi that is culturally
assigned to your group in a, in a broader
social ensemble. This has a huge effect on health
and on, on mental health as well. So we
know that loss of status, loss of dignity uh
can cause uh cardiovascular problems. It can cause all
kinds, it can trigger uh chronic illnesses, it can
even um trigger oo other kinds of uh yeah,
illnesses. So, um so those are the more kind
of obvious uh dimensions of uh the socio cultural
part of the the human species that have uh
a link to mental health. One that I'm particularly
interested in as a as an anthropologist, which I
suspect you might have discussed a bit with Professor
Kammeyer is also the narrative in the symbolic dimension
uh in particular, what anthropologists called idioms of distress.
So idioms of distress are uh culturally postulated ways
to make sense of suffering, uh to explain the
cause of suffering, but also to uh recommend particular
avenues for for cure. So, an idiom of distress
is really a kind of a full cultural package
that contains uh an explanation for a particular ailment,
but also that contains expectations for the phenomenological presentation
of how one is supposed to feel once one
is recruited into this narrative model and then particular
cultural scripts for you know, how to get better.
So what's interesting about idioms of distress is that
um they can be partly or holy or not
at all grounded in, in a scientific, you know,
quote unquote real uh comprehension of a phenomenon. So,
in some cultures, uh mental illness or indeed, illness
itself can be explained by uh uh you know,
the the doings of ancestors or spirits. Um IN
our culture, we often invoke things like hormones and
neurotransmitters. Um I'll, I'll note here as an anthropologist
that the level at which the average human mind
comprehends with going on in their body, how they're
supposed to feel. Uh It is the same. Uh
So from ancestors and, and spirits to say, you
know, serotonin or, or testosterone here, we're invoking metaphysical
ideas which very strangely and we'll talk about placebo
in a moment, have a, a kind of pin
log correlate. So again, in some cultures, someone might
start feeling dizzy and they might feel they might
think, OK, this is a wind attack or this
is a spirit attack and I should go get
a holy water treatment and say, uh in other
cultures, people will feel uh a little bit of
a pain in the left side of their arm
and they'll believe, OK, I'm having a heart attack.
Um AND I should call 911 and I should
go to the hospital. Uh But, but both examples
uh describe a, a human being mostly implicitly and
then automatically tapping into a kind of idiom of
distress. So I've become very interested in how uh
these idioms of distress which uh basically encode a
particular valence and phenomenological presentation in, in, in experience
can also be I want, I almost wanna say
causally uh can affect human health and human well
being. Uh So I've also been very interested in,
you know, probably since 2017 or so in what
I call the culture of mental health or mental
health culture. It's very interesting how uh you know,
5030 maybe even 20 fif 15 years ago by
summer camps, we didn't talk about mental health enough.
Uh There was, there was a stigma about it.
People suffered in silence, but now it seems to
me we talk about mental health all the time.
Uh So, so people now in many ways appear
to understand the tribulations of the ups and downs
of everyday life through a, a very interesting psychopathological
lens which through uh what you could call a
nocebo uh negative placebo effect could, could also in
a sense contribute to making people unwell.
Uh Which is very interesting. You mentioned that they
are the, the culture of mental health and I
fought many times that you hear all the time.
People claiming that we don't talk about mental health
enough for about particular, perhaps particular conditions enough. But
actually, we're hearing about it all the time nowadays,
at least I'm hearing about it all the time.
So,
yeah, I, I it's very strange, I wonder it
may be AAA reflection of something that ought to
be an anthropological law. This is a so called,
you know, Mo Mo Patrick Moynihan's law, uh the
American Senator who said, you know, the, the the
better things get the worse they seem there, there
appears to be a kind of anthropological mechanism there
that ought to be investigated more. Uh
But you mentioned no cables there, for example. So
from an anthropological perspective, that's where you come from
and also wedding with a clinical perspective, how do
you approach placebos? What is a placebo? Exactly?
Well, uh a better t for placebo and the
one using the literature is non-specific effect or non-specific
effects. So basically, um any aspect of, of a
cure or, or I which can be extended to
any uh modulation of unconscious uh bodily resources that
cannot be attributed to the intended mechanism of action.
So for example, you devise a particular pill, you
have a, a theory that a particular molecule may,
may cause something in the body, that thing in
the body does happen, but it's not caused by
that molecule, it's caused by other things. So placebo
effects are very complex and multifaceted this way. Uh
I know in popular culture, we tend to think
of them as uh as say a sugar pill
like the ones that are used in many randomized
control trial. But again, a placebo is, is any
modulation via an external cue of unconscious bodily resources
resulting in most cases, this is what we want
in a healing response, but it could also be
resulting in in an in an illness response in
anthropological terms. I like to think of um placebos
as a broad ecology of cues, of symbols of,
of rituals of paraphernalia. Uh BUT also of, of
specific encounters and of different psychological and psychosocial dimensions
that contribute to the cure. Uh And, and here,
I'm nodding to the works of uh Irving Kirch
from the placebo program at Harvard. Um So, I
mean, I could, I could list list of a
few of those. Um We know for example, very
interestingly that the the more elaborate uh a placebo
device or, or uh placebo ecology, usually the more
effective the response. So for example, uh taking four
pills, four times a day, placebo placebo pills works
better than one pill. Swallowing. Uh A big gel
cap that is difficult to swallow tends to work
better than just a simple sugar pill. Placebo injections
work even better. And then uh the absolute El
Dorado here, something really invasive like a placebo surgery
will work even better. So it seems there's also
a motivational dimension to this. The the more the
more costly, the more people have to personally sacrifice
to personally invest in the cure, the better it
works. Um We know that the uh particular dynamics
and the affect dynamics of the clinical encounter, which
as an anthropologist, I like to think of as
a shamanic encounter are very, very important. So in,
in all cultures, there are uh individuals who undergo
long initiations and eventually come to be, become masters
of a very esoteric language. Uh Going back to
idioms of distress. It's, it's most often language about
invisible particles uh that regulate the cosmos. So things
like spirits, ancestors, uh but also neurotransmitters um and,
and hormones. Um THESE are people who usually wear
very specific kinds of costumes. These are people that
you encounter in very difficult to access uh places.
So it could be like a cave at top
like this mythical cold mountain or it could be
uh it could be um an appointment at a
Neurological hospital after a six months waiting list, knowing
that the person is, is an expert. So this
this idea of epistemic expertise, the epistemic authority, someone
who is a recipient and expert uh in this
very esoteric knowledge is very important. The status, again,
the epistemic status assigned to the healer or, or,
or to the shaman, but also the, the, the
warmth um the, the hope that is conveyed, uh
the verbal suggestions that are delivered uh during a
particular clinical encounter are very important. So when, when
uh when a patient is, is led to believe
that he or she will get better. Uh AND
particularly once all the cues are in place or
recall, uh the the motivation, the difficulty to access,
the, the trust and and expertise, the paraphernalia, the
costumes. So we know that things like what, at
least in the West white blouses and, and stethoscopes.
When someone looks uh like a doctor, these things
tend to work uh very, very well. So I
could go on and on. But I think I've
outlined, you know, a few of the symbolic, you
know, ritual and interactive dimensions of, of these placebo
effects.
And there's also this notion of a super placebo.
What is it?
So a super placebo is something that uh a
few researchers and I and others and in other
labs have tried to toy around with which is
trying to stack up and experimentally manipulate as many
of the ritual, symbolic and psychosocial and technological dimensions
of placebos. So as to create a super placebo
procedure, one in which um the placebo response is
so strong that it may lead to very spectacular
kinds of healing.
And so I, I mean, how do you look
at placebos from a therapeutic perspective? Because uh I,
I guess that we could say they are doing
something, right? I mean, because sometimes I'm saying this
because many times people tend to dismiss certain effects.
So we it's just a placebo effect but it's
still in effect,
right? Yeah, to me, the notion that something is
just a placebo effect is, is, is ludicrous. However,
the the the question of placebo therapeutics raises all
kinds of very complex uh first epistemic and then
ethical questions. So, so again, remember that a placebo
is just whatever way to bypass or short circuit
conscious mechanisms. So as to tap into parts of
say, bodily responses that are not typically consciously accessible,
things like autonomic resources uh or, or, or healing
uh responses. Um It's a complicated question because I
want to say that at the time that I
was working on hypnosis, which is another way to
tap into these unconscious resources and placebo effects. I
might have been a little bit more naive than
uh where I am now given that I've uh
I've taken a lot of clinical training and, and
I, I've been working in a clinical and a
psychotherapeutic context uh for, for about four years now.
So I'm a little bit more skeptical about this
kind of uh you know, quick fixes and, and
this idea that you can, you know, instantly remove
a problem with a, with a quick uh intervention.
However, there is no question that, that wonderful, almost
miraculous things can be achieved with uh with a
placebo uh therapeutic, the medical profession and the medical
funding, the medical research funding bodies uh by and
large have been very reluctant to fund this kind
of research, probably because it raises difficult ethical questions
about the role of deception in healing, for example,
um If we lie to someone, what are the
possible consequences? Pragmatically, it could be, well, if they
find out that it was all a sham, so
to speak, um are they gonna stop? Uh ARE,
are they gonna get worse? Are the symptoms gonna
return? Uh IS there a risk that people might
lose trust in the institution of medicine, thereby actually
losing access to another placebo dimension. Uh THAT I
mentioned earlier because that's another point about placebo research
is that any intervention, any clinical encounter contains a
placebo dimension. So I hope uh was that those
could be harnessed, those could be used, but it
very well may, may, may be uh if we
lay aside the worry about deception for a while
that uh particularly when it comes to mental health
conditions, there are things that simply take a long
time to work on. Um So uh when you
look at the difficulties of a quote unquote mental
order, a lot of the time people have built
say defense mechanisms uh that help them function that
help them sustain uh the difficulties of life in
some sense, but that also cause impairments in other
aspects of their lives. Uh I think what most
psychotherapists and most mental health clinicians would tell you
is that if you remove a defense too quickly,
the person is often not equipped to function. So
you gotta go much, much slower. Uh You know,
if we had time, you know, we could, we
could talk about the current hype in in psychedelic
psychiatry, for example, which many of us think, you
know, carries that danger. It's, it's a little bit
too quick. Uh A fix um psychedelics, by the
way, this is, this is relevant to the current
conversation um to our best understanding, they are a
kind of super placebo enhancer uh psychedelics greatly exponentially
and greatly augment sensitivity to contextual cues. So they
make all the placebo dimensions of a clinical encounter
much more potent, which is why um as a
as a super tool, psychedelics have to be used
very, very cautiously like the, the the context and
the ethical context has to be um conceptualized very,
very cautiously. So in a nutshell, some of the
difficult questions around placebo therapeutics. Mhm
And also uh the there's this idea of neuro
placebos that has to do with the fact uh
with or with how people react to neuro imaging.
Could you tell us about
that? Yeah, I think simply uh neuro culture uh
neuro enchantment, my former mentor, Miraz calls it has
a lot of currency in our culture. Uh It
is an explanatory model that has very, very high
epistemic authority uh because of frequency of exposure uh
because of the very high epistemic status assigned to
everything neuro. So it's very interesting to me as
an anthropologist to see the way in which people
and young people routinely invoke the idea of the
brain as an agency other than the self. So
we often hear seven or eight year olds tell
you, oh, I have a DH D my frontal
lobes uh won't let me concentrate. And here in
the back of my mind, I'm thinking, well, yeah,
they're invoking the ancestors or, or the spirits. So
all this to say that um we talk about
neuro everything. At this point, we have, you know,
new nutrition, neurop politics and neuro education. Uh YEAH,
neurotechnology is, is very elaborate. It has this salience,
it has this this epistemic currency. So we know
that uh for rhetoric, for example, if you want
to make a particular argument, if you're able to
have just brain uh brain imaging pictures, people will
be convinced uh more, more easily. Uh So for
me, yeah, neurop Placebo is just a way to,
to tap into this this neuro culture as a
placebo intervention. And we, we, we've done a bit
of that experimentally in the lab and, and we
had very surprising results. Um So we used, for
example, building on, on the works of my former
mentor, Amir Raaz and his graduate students who are
doing different technologies, they, they were curious about the
extent to which people can be convinced first that
a machine could read their mind. So in, in,
in the first installment, way back in 2014, they
had a very crudely built a brain machine that
was not even explained in terms of the functioning
that was built from uh I believe a hairdresser's
uh hairdresser's helmet. And then with the uh the
help of the magic trick, uh people could very
easily be convinced that this brain machine could read
their thoughts, could, could guess what number they were
thinking of in subsequent experiments, um students and, and
researchers in the ra lab wanted to know if
people's behavior could be influenced by tapping into this
kind of neuro enchantment. And they also found that
they were through the use of the magic trick,
able to insert thoughts into people's minds. But at
the time, participants reported very interesting things, several of
whom reported uh feeling uh dizziness or, or tingling
or particular or, or a very dull headache. And
we began to wonder at the time if we
could tap into that a little further. Um So
we started using uh a much more elaborate mock
scanner uh that was used mock MRI scanner, uh
that was used for people with, with phobias to
train, going to the machine. And later, we got
to use a real although the defunct MRI at
a neurological hospital and we piloted a study with
Children with uh neurodevelopmental disorders and behavioral difficulties, uh
giving them specific suggestions uh about their symptoms, uh
encouraging them to believe that they would get better
and we found very strong results uh at the
time. Uh So that's, that's an example of a
of a super placebo intervention. We, we had uh
you know, we had a, we had a waiting
list. Uh We had people coming to this difficult
to get to Neurological hospital. We had this very
elaborate technology. Uh We had a warm pseudo clinicians
delivering very positive suggestions tailored to the child difficulties
and to the child's strength and, and we had
very promising results at the time. I say at
the time because, and here I'm going back to
potential pitfalls of these place placebo interventions. We're not
sure about how long those typically last. You, you
can create a very uh very hopeful, very euphoric
response once people are, are hooked to the novelty
of an intervention. Um BUT very few studies have
tracked in the long term, the longitudinal positive effects
of placebo interventions.
Mhm So getting to, I guess the last part
of our interview, going back to human cognition and
culture and some of the things we're going to
talk about here, you've probably already mentioned or touched
on when I asked you about the role that
culture plays in mental health. But tell us a
little bit about the free energy approach to human
cognition and culture. What is this approach about? How
does it work?
Yeah. So the, the free energy or the v
the variational free energy approach is, is a relatively
new uh mathematical formulation of something that I wanna
say has been known uh for a long time
uh in different cultures and different philosophically philosophical traditions.
Um NAMELY that um reality is some kind of
illusion or projection or that what we see is
really kind of what we expect. So the free
energy principle is, is borrowed from physics. Um And
it's really Professor K Fris and at Imperial College
London, a psychiatrist in Europe uh scientists who pioneered
these approaches. And we were fortunate with Lawrence Kammeyer,
others uh to, to work on uh with Professor
Kristen on a free energy formulation of the co
evolution of cognition and culture that we will talk
about uh in, in a culture. So the free
energy principle describes the way in which organisms strive
to maintain themselves in a state of self-organization by
resisting entropic decay. So I I I'll cut the
long story short here because physicists and mathematicians uh
sometimes are unhappy with the way in which we,
we use the term entropy, we use the term
entropy here in information theoretic terms about the amount
of possibilities uh that are possibilities that are available
to uh specific organism in any, in any different
system. So the idea is that uh hu life
as a whole attempts to resist entropy by maintaining
itself by making itself consistent. But minimizing free energy
here means free energy. Uh FOR living things refers
to the average gap or the mismatch between what
an organism expects and what it gets what external
states of the world uh afford if you will.
So these expectations are primarily based on evolved dispositions,
but then behavior will be uh evolved dispositions plus
or minus constraints in the environment. Uh A, a
kind of a parallel sister approach to uh the
free energy principle is the predictive processing paradigm in
cognitive science, which which I I know you're, you're
knowledgeable about uh which is again, this idea that
uh individual organisms uh scan statistical regularities in the
world around them and what they get in the
world. So as to predict optimized behavior, to deal
with particular uh fitness, relevant solutions, what we try
to do with the uh cultural affordances and thinking
throughout the mind's model is apply this to human
cognition. First of all, and to apply this to
uh to the the evolution of culture and to
the cultural part of, of human beings, the free
energy principle and predictive processing describes the behavior of
individual brains quite well. But what we felt was
missing was this. And I want to call it
this internet dimension, this kind of uh this network
of all their minds. One of our hypotheses, which
I want to say still needs to be verified
empirically through uh different methods is that the the
domains of statistical regularities in the world that are
most important to humans. So as to be able
to create models, internal models uh to function and
to survive is of their minds. So this is
what we call the thinking throughout the mind framework.
For this kind of uh in mathematical terms that
the mark of blankets, the statistical buffer between an
individual's uh expectations and the world around them. Humans
outsource these solutions to all the minds, to caregivers
to their group. Um But it's interesting to think
of uh things like institutions like and technologies like
uh language, uh kinship, uh politics as anti anthropic
as entropy minimizing kinds of mechanisms. So of late,
I've also become interested in uh political polarization as
you know, but of political polarization as a kind
of uh entropy minimization. It's very interesting to note,
for example, how uh whenever there's a rapid disruption
in a socio cultural ecology, so this could be
a pandemic, it could be a natural disaster. Uh
But very sadly, for democracies, it could be also
be when uh people's what psychotherapist called assumptive worlds.
So the totality of expectations um about what people
hold to be true and good in the world.
Whenever that changes too quickly, people, people tend to
kind of retract uh to a more say a
more kind of conservative position. So an influx of
mass immigration, for example, will typically cause a rise
in populism or a tightening of social norms or
tightening of values for uh for certain uh at
least for certain groups who feel like they don't
recognize the world around them because it has become
too entropic because uh it has become too complex.
A and so uh but uh how do cognition
and culture interrelate? Because if I understand it correctly,
the free energy principle applies first to cognition and
then you move from cognition to culture. Is that
correct?
Right. Although talking of cognition and culture for humans
is almost a pleonasm I want to say because
human cognition is in my view, first and foremost,
optimized for cultural learning. So for collective learning, uh
we know that the, the, the minimal cognitive ingredient
for sociality is a theory of mind or the
the ability to understand others mental states, the ability
to understand others perspective, uh joint intentionality uh is
a, is another synonym for that. We know that
a lot of uh our energy budget, a lot
of our cognitive budget goes to social scenarios and
goes to social learning. It's very interesting when you
look at things like um different cognitive styles um
like the the autistic spectrum. For example, people who
are uh hyper denial and high on the autistic
spectrum have these savant abilities. Simply as a question
of uh energy allocation. It seems that they're spending
much less on social, much less cognitive budget on
the social scenarios which occupies just so much of
our mental space I say are for most neurotypical
which confers them the savant like abilities uh in,
in in other domains. Um But again, human cognition
is is already optimized for culture and for cultural
learning.
Mhm So it's not possible to strictly separate human
cognition for culture or to talk about culture or
to talk about cognition. Sorry, that is independent from
the culture, right?
I I it's difficult to know, for example, the
extent to which uh infant cognition is already inculturated.
For sure. There is a process of developmental scaffolding
uh whereby as as behavior becomes culturally patterned and,
and, and reinforced, it becomes more linguistically enriched, it
becomes more uh symbolically enriched. So it's as though
uh over the course of ontogeny, over the course
of the development, we go from a a relative
relatively individual modes of cognition to increasingly uh more
social and collective kinds of, of cognition. But uh
when we look at the kinds of behavioral differences
in in infant behavior, at the level of feeding,
at the level of fussiness, at the level of
attachment styles that exist, you know, much before language
acquisition, we know that cultural happening is is already
happening in under the hood, implicitly uh at a
very, very early age.
Mhm OK. So let's get into two very specific
aspects of human culture here. That will probably be
my last two questions. So how do humans learn
shared expectations and norms through these framework?
This is very interesting. We don't know uh we
know that human learned shared expectations and I would
say that's already progress in cognitive science in terms
of understanding what happens. So we have a better
understanding of what happens, but we don't exactly know
how it happens. Uh If I'm to describe a
little bit of what happens, well, precisely as you
said, uh humans uh very early in development, learn
shared expectations, uh they learn uh situationally appropriate context,
appropriate responses to different situations that are more and
more culturally scripted. Uh IF you will. So we
know that uh young humans are able to outsource
expectations on uh how to behave and, and, and
even even how to feel uh on a pre
linguistic level. So with Professor Ker, Professor Frisson, Professor
Maxwell Ramstead and others, uh we, we've talked about
what we call these regimes of attention uh the
way in which pattern cultural practice uh makes particular
features of the world salient, salient or not. So
it's interesting to note how from one cultural ensemble
to the next people pay attention to different features
of the world. And they tend to assign a
particular the valence to different features of the world.
And then those different cues will trigger different kinds
of behaviors. So we know that this happens, but
we don't really know how uh there is in
cultural learning, the same kind of poverty of stimulus
problem uh as there is in uh in, in
language acquisition. So the poverty of stimulus was a
problem famously posed by Noam Chomsky when he pointed
out that most people, most humans are not. In
fact, no humans are taught uh the workings of
grammar and syntax. Um AND, and, and how to
string units of town together yet they're able to
infer from relatively little explicit instruction. So when it
comes to cultural learning, the same problem is observed,
um young people are very, very quickly able to
acquire uh values and to obey social norms, to
obey a lot of implicit social norms. Um I'll
give you another example from more kind of cultural
psychiatry, we know that tolerance to pain is, is
subject to uh wide cross cultural differences. And there's
a lot of things that happen. Um It could
be that, you know, a child intuitively learns uh
a normative response inside her body by watching how
her parents react. For example, is this a big
deal? Is this not, should I cry? What happens
when I cry when I get picked up? But,
but also what does it mean to get picked
up? Uh Is it seen as a good thing
or is it seen as a bad thing? Um
So we know that a person's behavior, a person's
thoughts, a person's value system, but a person's phenomenology,
I I is really shaped by culture to an
extraordinary extent uh without explicit instruction. So again, to
sum up, um how are these shared expectations learned?
We don't know
it, it's interesting that you mentioned Payton there because
I, if I uh please correct me if I'm
wrong. But I guess that those expectations that we
develop about pain and how we should react to
pain and so on actually tend to have real
physiological effects, right? In terms of, for example, liberating
our pain threshold and how much pain people report
in several different contexts and perhaps uh uh the
level of pain that they actually uh phenomenological experience
for sure, you know, pain is still an intractable
philosophical and, and anthropological problem it's very difficult to
measure pain, uh pain at its core begins with
a neurophysiological response to a particular stimulus. Uh AND
then allocating attentional resources to a part of the
body. Let's say that needs attention. But in order
for pain to become something like suffering, uh for
so suffering to be encoded as an unwanted experience
assigned with a negative valence that feels bad. So
the particular physiological event requires a cognitive interpretation which
we call for humans as a cognitive interpretation is
culturally framed. So we're already recruiting and importing all
kinds of implicit values and, and idioms of distress.
But note the ways in which experiences that could
be considered painful in different micro cultural contexts, like
say athletics, for example, or even to say particular
sexual practices uh will be encoded with a positive
valence and will physio fundament logically um feel good
or for example, I guess also in certain religious
rituals like walking on fire where many times uh
I mean, for people who don't have those kinds
of practices, it might seem really weird. But many
times people in those kinds of rituals, if they
are asked after the fact, they don't report any
pain or very little pain.
Right. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I think you're, you're nodding
to the work of my colleague, Dimitri Sigalas. Uh
Yeah. Yes. Fire walking in extreme rituals. Um Again,
the the the the the neutral physiological event here
is is arousal. So increased heart rate and increased
respiration and skin conductivity. But that doesn't tell us
anything about cinema logically, but it feels like to
the people uh outside of their own cognitive interpretation
and really outside of, of the whole package of,
of cultural framing that extends to particular ritual moments.
It's just fascinating again, the way in which the
human physiology responds to cultural contact,
which is actually very interesting because the physiological response
might be very similar to someone who reports pain.
Uh But it's not just uh the simple fact
that the no C seor get activated, that the
person will report experiencing pain actually. Right.
Yes, that's correct.
Mhm So let's get into one final question again,
having to do with human culture, how does social
conformity develop?
Well, I think we've already mostly answered that question
in, in that we have failed to answer the
question. We just know uh we just know that
it develops and it develops uh slowly and then
exponentially uh over the course of development. Uh ADOLESCENCE
is a time of particular vulnerability to social influences
in in psychodynamic and psychoanalytic terms. It's also a
time of kind of separation and individuation. So again,
rather than tell you how it develops, I could
describe the ways in which I could tell you
that it develops in different and interesting ways uh
over the course of development. So I was, you
know, mentioning adolescence is a moment when uh I
guess a human organism having acquired, let's say enough
about the home and family and micro environment uh
becomes very open to those meso and micro sources
and, and starts experimenting with different kinds of identities.
Um But I, I very much like the, yeah,
the psychodynamic formulation of separation individuation with an anthropological
twist uh in that becoming an, becoming an individual
necessarily requires uh social conformity and necessarily requires becoming
inculturated into uh another uh sometimes broader uh set
of social social convention. Um And uh and I
think we've already described uh with many examples also
about how far social conformity extends, including to physiological
responses, including to phenomenology uh to what it feels
like to be a human in, in a particular
situation. Um We would like to hope that the
predictive processing and free energy formulations that we've proposed
uh help to some extent uh describe the mechanisms
of conformity. But I want to remain humble and
say that we just, we just don't exactly know
uh why and how that works.
OK. So uh just one quick final question, then
do, do you think that uh social conformity and
understanding it would tie in any way to the
uh the beginning of our discussion when we talked
about the effects of the psychological effects of the
internet? And you mentioned things like social contagion.
Mhm Yeah. Again, the, the internet is underpinned by
so many paradoxes uh apparent and illusory paradoxes I
wanna say um because the internet appears to have
significantly scrambled social conformity and created an explosion of
new ways of being humans and new ways of
being gendered and new ways of being young. And
it has, you know, uh certainly increased the the
kind of gap between uh say young people and
older people that just a very quick parallel this
sort of conservation innovation trade off is I think
best cashed out under under a free energy formulation.
But because humans require culture in order to function,
uh We're faced with a very difficult problem in
trade off in that we need to be in
any given moment in history. We need to be
able to uh keep a set of conserved, tried
true and tested solutions for surviving, how to raise
our young and, and how to organize our societies.
But we also need to be able to innovate,
we need to be able to remain open to
novel challenges that arise. It could be because of
ecological changes because of social changes. And it seems
as humans, we've not been, we haven't really figured
out where we sit on that and, and there's
strong individual differences which I think from a niche
construction perspective work quite well in, in a society.
You need innovators and you need more conservative people.
Um The internet appears to have uh and I
and I wanna say, appears to have ushered us
towards uh the innovation end of that spectrum, perhaps
to too far an extent uh you very often
hear younger people say, well, why should I trust
elders? Why should I trust boomers? They don't understand
how to navigate the world around us. They don't,
they don't know how to navigate social media. They
don't, they don't know the, the current cultural codes.
So there appears to be a lot of novelty,
there appears to be where it appears to have
been ushered towards an endless road towards innovation. I
want to say at the cost of of some
of the try to and tested solution for how
to run our societies. But that's, that's a separate
problem. And uh the ontological dimensions interest me more
than the ethical dimensions. Why I say this is
an illusory problem because necessarily when new ways, new
innovative ways of being are are organically devised, they
create a particular kind of social conformity. So conformity
is now of course, no longer bound to uh
uh spatial boundaries that we can empirically experience ourselves.
Uh You know, you can have communities of social
conformity that are spread across the planet. But conformity
needs to happen in order for people to have
shared expectation, a common repertoire, a common values. So
we see a lot of this loosening up and
tightening up, loosening up and tightening up.
Great. So, Doctor Visa, let's end on that note
then and just before we go, would you like
to tell people where they can find you and
your work on the internet?
Oh, I'm not sure. I'm not that good at
self promotion. Actually, perhaps you could put a link
to my website and
OK, no, no problem. I will put a link
to your website and also a few other links.
But yeah, they can, you can look up, I,
I used to write for, for psychology today to
try to offer cultural cognitive evolutionary explanations of what
goes on in the world. II, I haven't written
in, in a few years. I've been taking the
time to think, you know, uh as I ponder
my, my reconversion, my reconversion as a therapist and
move much more towards psychoanalysis. Now, I think at
this point, uh having gone from anthropology to hardcore
cognitive science to the clinical world, I find that
uh psycho and psychoanalysis for me at this point
offers just a fascinating window into a much more
fine grained understanding of the complexities of the human
mind,
right? So, thank you so much again for taking
the time to come on the show. It's been
a pleasure to talk with you.
Thank you Ricardo. It was, it was a pleasure
as well. Let's stay in touch.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights Learning
and development. Then differently check the website at N
lights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or paypal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Perego Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno
Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam, Castle Matthew Whitten
Bear. No wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Connors Philip
Forrest Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine in NAI
Z Mar Nevs calling in Hobel, Governor Mikel Stormer,
Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferger Ken Hall, her
ma J and Lain Jung Y and the Samuel
K Hes Mark Smith J. Tom Hummel S Friends,
David Sloan Wilson Yaar, Roman Roach Diego, Jan Punter
Romani Charlotte Bli Nicole Barba, Adam Hunt Pavlo Stassi
na Me, Gary G Alman, Samo, Zal Ari and
Y. Polton John Barboza, Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden
Broner Douglas Fry Franka La Gilon Cortez or Solis
Scott Zachary ftdw Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Giorgio,
Luke Loki, Georgio Theophano Chris. Williams and Peter Wo
David Williams Di A Costa Anton Erickson Charles Murray,
Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Fists, Larry
Dey junior, Old Ebon, Starry Michael Bailey. Then Spur
by Robert Grassy Zorn, Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas
Radick Mark Temple, Thomas Dvor Luke Neeson, Chris Tory
Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica Week in the B
brand Nicholas Carlson Ismael Bensley Man, George Katis, Valentine
Steinman, Perlis Kate Von Goler, Alexander Albert Liam Dae
Biar Masoud Ali Mohammadi. Perpendicular Jer Urla. Good enough
Gregory Hastings David Pins of Sea Nelson Mike Levin
and Jos Net. A special thanks. To my producers
is our web, Jim Frank Lucani, Tom Vig and
Bernard N Cortes Dixon, Bendik Muller Thomas Rumble, Catherine
and Patrick Tobin, John Carl, Negro, Nick Ortiz and
Nick Golden. And to my executive producers, Matthew lavender,
Sergi, Adrian Bogdan Knit and Rosie. Thank you for
all.